docs(blog): add pypi compiled file extension blog (#7557)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/posts/querying-pypi-metadata-compiled-languages/index.qmd

---
title: Querying every file in every release on the Python Package Index (redux)
author: Gil Forsyth
date: 2023-11-15
categories:
    - blog
---

Seth Larson wrote a great [blog
post](https://sethmlarson.dev/security-developer-in-residence-weekly-report-18)
on querying a PyPI dataset to look for trends in the use of memory-safe
languages in Python.

You should check out Seth's article for more information on the dataset (and
it's a good read!) but it caught our eye because it makes use of
[DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/) to clean the data for analysis.

That's right up our alley here in Ibis land, so let's see if we can duplicate
Seth's results (and then continue on to plot them!)

## Grab the data (locations)

Seth showed (and then safely decomposed) a nested `curl` statement and that's
always viable -- we're in Python land so why not grab the filenames using
`urllib3`?

```{python}
import urllib3

http = urllib3.PoolManager()

resp = http.request("GET", "https://github.com/pypi-data/data/raw/main/links/dataset.txt")

parquet_files = resp.data.decode().split()
parquet_files
```

## Grab the data

Now we're ready to get started with Ibis!

> DuckDB is clever enough to grab parquet metadata.  We can use `read_parquet` to

Reviewer: > DuckDB is clever enough to grab parquet metadata.

Hm, I'm not sure I follow why this is important here. Maybe "grab parquet metadata" needs more explanation?

Author: yeah, I'll expand on this, I was aiming for "you don't need to download everything beforehand"

create a lazy view of the parquet files and then build up our expression.

```{python}
import ibis
from ibis import _  # <1>

ibis.options.interactive = True
```

> 1. See ... for docs on the deferred operator!

Reviewer: Needs to be filled in I'm guessing :)

Author: bad habit.  I clicked resolved when I fixed it on my local, not when I pushed.  Just polishing now.

Author: Now, finally, pushed the changes

> We can create a DuckDB connection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a DuckDB connection:
```

```{python}
con = ibis.duckdb.connect()
```

> And now let's load up one of the files (we can run the full query after)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And load up one of the files (we can run the full query after)!
```

```{python}
pypi = con.read_parquet(parquet_files[0], table_name="pypi")
```

```{python}
pypi.schema()
```

## Query crafting

Let's break down what we're looking for. As a high-level view of the use of
compiled languages, Seth is using file extensions as an indicator that a given
filetype is used in a Python project.

The dataset we're using has _every file in every project_ -- what criteria should we use?

We can follow Seth's lead and look for things:

1. A file extension that is one of: `asm`, `cc`, `cpp`, `cxx`, `h`, `hpp`, `rs`, `go`, and variants of `F90`, `f90`, etc...
   That is, C, C++, Assembly, Rust, Go, and Fortran.
2. We exclude matches where the file path is within the `site-packages/` directory.
3. We should exclude matches that are in directories used for testing.

```{python}
expr = pypi.filter(
    [
        _.path.re_search(r"\.(asm|c|cc|cpp|cxx|h|hpp|rs|[Ff][0-9]{0-2}(?:or)?|go)$"),
        ~_.path.re_search(r"(^|/)test(|s|ing)"),
        ~_.path.contains("/site-packages/"),
    ]
)

> ```
> 
> ```{python}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```{python}
```

I always find the separate render visually odd, but up to you whether you want to leave it in.

expr
```

That _could_ be right -- we can peak at the filename at the end of the `path` column to do a quick check:

```{python}
expr.path.split("/")[-1]
```

Ok! Next up, we want to group the matches by:

1. The month that the package / file was published
   For this, we can use the `truncate` method and ask for month as our truncation window.
2. The file extension of the file used

```{python}
expr.group_by(

>     [
>         _.uploaded_on.truncate("M").name("month"),
>         _.path.re_extract(r"\.([a-z0-9]+)$", 1).name("ext"),
>     ]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    month=_.uploaded_on.truncate("M"),
    ext=_.path.re_extract(r"\.([a-z0-9]+)$", 1),
```

).aggregate()
```

That looks promising. Now we need to grab the package names that correspond to a
given file extension in a given month and deduplicate it. And to match Seth's
results, we'll also sort by the month in descending order:

```{python}
expr = (
    expr.group_by(

>         [
>             _.uploaded_on.truncate("M").name("month"),
>             _.path.re_extract(r"\.([a-z0-9]+)$", 1).name("ext"),
>         ]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        month=_.uploaded_on.truncate("M"),
        ext=_.path.re_extract(r"\.([a-z0-9]+)$", 1),
```

    )
    .aggregate(projects=_.project_name.collect().unique())
    .order_by(_.month.desc())
)

expr
```

## Massage and plot

Let's continue and see what our results look like.

We'll do a few things:

1. Combine all of the C and C++ extensions into a single group by renaming them all.
2. Count the number of distinct entries in each group
3. Plot the results!

```{python}
collapse_names = expr.mutate(
    ext=_.ext.re_replace(r"cxx|cpp|cc|c|hpp|h", "C/C++")
    .replace("rs", "Rust")
    .replace("go", "Go")
    .replace("asm", "Assembly"),
)

collapse_names
```

Note that now we need to de-duplicate again, since we might've had separate

> "unique" entries for both an `h` and `c` file extension, and we don't want to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unique entries for both an `h` and `c` file extension, and we don't want to
```

Are the quotes meaningful here?

double-count!

We could rewrite our original query and include the renames in the original
`group_by` (this would be the smart thing to do), but let's push on and see if
we can make this work.

The `projects` column is now a column of string arrays, so we want to collect

> all of the arrays in each group, this will give us a "list of lists", then we'll
> want to `flatten` that list, then `unique().length()` as before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all of the arrays in each group, this will give us a "list of lists", then we'll
`flatten` that list and call `unique().length()` as before.
```

> DuckDB has a `flatten` function, but it isn't exposed in Ibis (yet!), so we'll
> use a handy bit of Ibis magic to define a `builtin` `UDF` that will map directly
> onto the underlying DuckDB function (what!? See
> [here](https://ibis-project.org/how-to/extending/builtin.html#duckdb) for more
> info):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DuckDB has a `flatten` function, but it isn't exposed in Ibis (yet!).

We'll use a handy bit of Ibis magic to define a `builtin` `UDF` that will map directly
onto the underlying DuckDB function (what!? See
[here](https://ibis-project.org/how-to/extending/builtin.html#duckdb) for more
info):
```

```{python}
@ibis.udf.scalar.builtin
def flatten(x: list[list[str]]) -> list[str]:
    ...

collapse_names = collapse_names.group_by(["month", "ext"]).aggregate(
    projects=flatten(_.projects.collect())
)

collapse_names
```

We could have included the `unique().length()` in the `aggregate` call, but
sometimes it's good to check that your slightly off-kilter idea has worked (and
it has!).

```{python}
collapse_names = collapse_names.select(
    _.month, _.ext, project_count=_.projects.unique().length()
)

collapse_names
```

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This looks a bit odd on GitHub. I'm suggesting to kill the empty lines.

Now that the data are tidied, we can pass our expression directly to Altair and see what it looks like!

```{python}
import altair as alt

chart = (
    alt.Chart(collapse_names)
    .mark_line()
    .encode(x="month", y="project_count", color="ext")
    .properties(width=600, height=300)
)
chart
```

## The full run

To recap -- we pulled a lazy view of a single parquet file from the `pypi-data`
repo, filtered for all the files that contain file extensions we care about,
then grouped them all together to get counts of the various filetypes used
across projects by month.

Here's the entire query chained together into a single command, now running on
all of the `parquet` files we have access to:

```{python}
pypi = con.read_parquet(parquet_files, table_name="pypi")

full_query = (
    pypi.filter(
        [
            _.path.re_search(
                r"\.(asm|c|cc|cpp|cxx|h|hpp|rs|[Ff][0-9]{0-2}(?:or)?|go)$"
            ),
            ~_.path.re_search(r"(^|/)test(|s|ing)"),
            ~_.path.contains("/site-packages/"),
        ]
    )
    .group_by(

>         [
>             _.uploaded_on.truncate("M").name("month"),
>             _.path.re_extract(r"\.([a-z0-9]+)$", 1).name("ext"),
>         ]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        month=_.uploaded_on.truncate("M"),
        ext=_.path.re_extract(r"\.([a-z0-9]+)$", 1),
```
